We all know about Flask and Django.
And of course, FastAPI made a huge splash when it came on the scene a few years ago.
But new web frameworks are being created all the time.
And they have these earlier frameworks to borrow from as well.
On this episode, we dive into a new framework gaining a lot of traction called Litestar.
Will it be the foundation of your next project?
Join me as I get to know Litestar with its maintainers, Jacob Coffey,
Janek Nowianty, and Jacob Finchner.
This is episode 433, recorded August 30th, 2023.
Welcome to Talk Python to Me, a weekly podcast on Python.
This is your host, Michael Kennedy.
Follow me on Mastodon, where I'm@mkennedy and follow the podcast using at Talk Python,
both on fosstodon.org.
Keep up with the show and listen to over seven years of past episodes at talkpython.fm.
We've started streaming most of our episodes live on YouTube.
Subscribe to our YouTube channel over at talkpython.fm/youtube to get notified
about upcoming shows and be part of that episode.
This episode is brought to you by Sentry and us over at Talk Python Training.
Please check out what we're both offering during our segments.
It really helps support the show.
Everyone, Janek, Jacob, Cody, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
Hey, thanks for having us.
Good to be here.
Yeah, it's great to have you all here.
Really excited to talk about one of my favorite topics, web frameworks, APIs,
async performance, design patterns, like, let's do this.
Let's do it.
Cool.
So we're going to talk about Litestar, which is somewhat new to me.
I haven't known about it that long, but looking at the GitHub stars being
several thousand GitHub stars and release two, it's definitely been going for a while.
So it's a really cool framework that I think people will definitely be excited to learn about.
But before we get to that, let's start with you all.
Just a quick introduction for each of you.
Go around the Brady Bunch squares of our video here.
Janek, you want to go first?
Yeah.
Yeah, sure.
My name is Janek.
Obviously, I'm a Python developer from Germany, currently living in Cologne.
So I'm a bit behind the rest of the other guys when it comes to the time zones.
I would put it a different way, Janek.
I'd say you're living in the future.
You're living hours ahead of time.
You know what's already happened.
Oh, yeah.
That sounds much nicer.
Yeah.
Well, I currently work as a Python developer.
Before I got into Python, I worked as a carpenter.
So I've built furniture and other cool stuff.
I think that's all we need to know right now.
So, Cody, why don't you continue?
Yeah, I'll be happy to.
So hey, Michael.
Hey, guys.
I'm Cody.
Really, I've kind of had an interesting journey into the Python space.
And so I'm kind of probably atypical from the rest of the team here.
And so I've actually been a long time database guy, specifically in Oracle.
And so lots of big, nasty data warehouses, large transaction systems,
and building all the glue that you've got to do to make that stuff run.
And so I guess really my intro to Python was really around DevOps,
doing how do you make the whole environment stay running?
How do you keep it efficient?
And it's really focused on the database side of things.
And so about 10 years ago, moved to Dallas from Alabama,
originally where I'm from, and joined a small team of Oracle developers.
And so we got acquired by one of the big four consulting firms.
And so at that point, I shifted into development,
from development and into cloud migrations.
So did quite a bit of just Oracle database migrations into the various cloud providers.
And now, just long, about six years later, I've now wound up at Google
as part of the database black belt team there.
And I still try to figure out exactly what a database black belt is.
But a year in, really what I can tell you is that
what I do is talk to all of our biggest customers
and figure out what are the features and things that they need
to make their enterprises run on Google Cloud.
And we work with the engineers to make that happen.
What an interesting background.
I would say having a really good background in databases,
and especially the DevOps side of databases,
is a pretty unique view for building a web framework.
A lot of people are all about,
oh, I got to have something for my front end code,
my JavaScript I'm writing, right?
And that's really not the same.
Yes, and my career actually originally started using,
well, I guess now they're called low code tools,
but we used to call them rapid application development.
And so there's just lots of database builders
where there really wasn't any actual Python or any Java
or those types of code involved.
It was all PL SQL.
So I was actually happy to get involved in the Python world
and move out of that space.
So yeah, excellent. Awesome. Jacob.
Hey, I'm pretty new to being a developer.
I spent the last four or five years in the system space,
more on like the IT side of things,
building systems and helping users.
The last year though, I've gotten to DevOps on my team
at O'Reilly, auto parts, not the book people.
Been really interesting,
but recently I got to join this team and I'm learning a lot.
So this is really exciting for me to be here.
Yeah, well, it's awesome to have you here.
And like I said, a really exciting web project
that I think people will appreciate.
So let's go ahead and jump into it.
So Litestar at lightstar.dev,
effortlessly build performant APIs.
So who wants to give us the elevator pitch here?
The 30 second view of Litestar.
Janik, I think Cody should do that.
Oh, Janik, I'd like to hear what you think.
And then I can give you about my perspective
of how I kind of joined the team and what it means to me.
But I think it would be helpful to hear
how you think about it.
All right. So what is Litestar?
Well, I think our tagline is pretty, puts it pretty well.
We definitely have a focus on building APIs.
So not, well, not typical HTML applications monolith.
It's often compared to FastAPI,
and it has similarities, definitely,
which FastAPI is already in the name.
It's also focused on building APIs,
but for us really important is the effortless part.
So what we strive to do is to take away all the,
well, not all, but as much as we can
take away the boilerplate for developers,
you usually have to do anyway
when you're building any project of size,
which includes lots of stuff like authorization,
caching, ORM integration,
and all these kinds of things that you usually have to do.
And with micro frameworks like Flask or FastAPI
or Starlette or any of the other ones out there,
because there are a lot of them,
and they are all really great at what they're doing,
but they do require to build a lot of boilerplates,
which can be good because it gives you a lot of control
over what you're doing,
and you can build it exactly how you want to.
But it's also not, well, it's not completely effortless,
which is what we are trying to achieve.
Yeah, when I think about the web frameworks,
I have this sort of bimodal distribution at like two ends.
On one end, you have Django,
where it comes with all of these helpers
and all of these things.
Like you just say, yes, I want a whole back end
to manage my database with a UI, for example, right?
Well, there's a bunch of those kinds of things,
form creation and the ORM migrations,
all that stuff is kind of just, you get it all.
And the other end, you have Flask
and you have FastAPI and a whole bunch of others,
Sanic, you name it.
And there's a lot, and they're all about,
we're going to go and handle the request,
and then it's up to you.
Do you want a database?
You can have a database.
If you don't want one, don't have one.
In that regard, FastAPI itself
is kind of almost prescriptive
in that it talks about having like model exchange
and defining models that create how the website works.
Whereas Flask doesn't even have that.
You just kind of nailed it.
And this is actually how I kind of came into,
it was actually Starlette at the time.
But I guess about four years ago,
I built a pretty large scale Django app
for some consulting work.
And it was really around data quality and data migration.
And it worked really well.
But I was reading all this stuff about FastAPI
and I really liked what I was seeing.
And the developer experience of that was really incredible.
And the tools that those guys put together
was just kind of second to none.
It was really refreshing to see that kind of build
in over what you see in Django.
And so I started working with FastAPI and really liked it.
But I got to where I felt like I had a lot of boilerplate
that I added on top of that to get to that working app.
And so when we joined up with Google,
one of the things that I did was say,
okay, I've got a lot of like boilerplate
for things that I need to run this app.
And maybe there's somewhere that I can contribute.
And so at that point,
I started looking around at all the web frameworks.
And that's when I got introduced to Starlette at the time.
And just to give a little bit of a history,
it was originally called Starlette
because it was based on Starlet,
just like all the other ASCII frameworks out there.
And obviously Starlette is an awesome tool.
And we were kind of paying respect to that
by naming it Starlette.
But obviously there's very few letters
in between that and Starlet.
And so what we found is that many of the posts that we made,
people were confusing,
hey, did you mean Starlet?
Because I don't know what a Starlette is.
And so long story short,
we said, okay, it's time for us to rename.
And I guess we're all not too original
because we just flipped the wording around.
And that's how we came up with Litestar.
It's a cool name. I like it.
Yeah. And just for people who don't necessarily know,
much of FastAPI's magic is that it's built on Starlet.
And so in a sense,
you're running on the same foundation
as FastAPI in that regard, right?
No, we're actually not anymore.
So...
Okay. That was the original. All right.
I think we have dropped Starlet
as a dependency about like six, seven months ago,
before version two.
Yeah.
So in the beginning, we were...
Well, Starlette is built very, very modular.
You can use like FastAPI, use the whole thing,
and you can just extend the router
and don't care about anything.
But it's also designed in such a way
that you can just take certain things of it.
So you can say, okay, I just like the routing
and the rest I'll do myself.
And what we originally did was we had our own router,
our own routing system, and plugged that into Starlet
and built our own application on top of that.
But over time, we have diverged quite a lot
from the way Starlette wanted to do things,
or well, not wanted to do things,
but Starlette became a bit restrictive
because we wanted to do things very differently
at very deep parts of the Starlette stack.
And so it kind of made sense to us
that we just wrote our own basically
and filled in the gaps that Starlette left behind,
which wasn't an easy decision
because Starlette is a very great piece of technology
and it's very well done.
And it's got a lot of credibility to it, right?
You know, there's a lot of people
that run it in production,
and that means something when you have a tool
that is known to work well.
It was a bit of a challenge to get that going.
But yeah, at the moment, we are from the ASGI side,
our very own thing.
We don't depend on anything else in that regard anymore.
Okay. And is that all Python
or is that got some other technology making it go in there?
So that part, the ASGI part is all Python.
We have some other non-Python parts,
but they are not at the web serving side, let's say.
So we've rustified, I guess that's the term, if you will,
at least one place.
That's the URL parsers, right?
Yeah, the query parsers.
Okay. That certainly is a strong trend these days.
Although I'm surprised for a framework
that hasn't been around that long
that it's already got rust.
No, just kidding.
We experimented about a year ago.
We experimented actually with more rust
and that was to do the routing in rust.
So we use a Redix-based router.
That's something Sanic does that as well.
And we experimented with a rust implementation,
but it was decided that the speed up
that we got from using rust wasn't really worth
the trade-off between it being harder to maintain
and being less accessible for other contributors.
Because most of the people who are using
a Python web framework, they will know Python,
but they're not necessarily that fluent in rust.
And well, basically the router wasn't really
that big of a bottleneck for Starlette at the time.
So it didn't make a lot of sense
to write that part in rust.
Yeah. It's a big trade-off, isn't it?
Even things like shipping wheels
and just pushing out a version.
Once you start to go into a, well,
there's a per platform compilation step.
That has a lot of friction, right?
And I'm sure you could do a whole podcast
just on packaging, but Python packaging
in and of itself is not always the easiest
or most intuitive process.
And so, yeah, it definitely gets complicated
when you add in another language.
Yeah, I can imagine.
And in a lot of cases, there are more low-hanging fruits
that you can grab and just optimize things there
before you say, okay, now we have optimized everything
so well, the only way we can get faster
if we now use a language like rust.
And I don't think we're at that part yet.
So we have yet still a lot of things to do.
That's excellent.
It's a really good philosophy too, I think.
There's an interesting new way
to make your Python code faster
that used to be the case
when Moore's law was really in effect.
You went from a 486 to a Pentium
to a whatever gigahertz
and from megahertz to gigahertz
and all those things, you just wait
and the hardware got faster.
So your code went faster.
But with the faster CPython initiative
and Guido and Mark Shannon and team over there,
they're making Python quite a bit faster constantly
with every release.
It's really impressive what they've done.
It was a noticeable for the projects
that I'm currently using Lightswirl
and it was a noticeable increase in performance
when I went to 3.11.
And yeah, looking forward to seeing what all they do
over the next couple of releases.
– Yeah, we just last week, I think,
no, this week perhaps,
had the release candidate for 3.12.
So it's kind of final besides the bugs,
which is, you know, people can start testing it
and see what's to come out of there as well.
– Yeah, we haven't actually tested yet with 3.12
because we're still waiting
on some of our dependencies
to be compatible with that.
Jacob, do you want to say something?
– We just have two more.
I think it's GRPC and Greenlet.
Greenlet actually, I think, is ready,
but they need to do a release to PyPI.
But the GRPC is, I think, one of our stragglers.
– Okay.
– I've been eager to test that
and see what kind of performance we can get.
I guess we could do the RC one now,
but we'll wait.
– We should probably test it out at some point.
– Okay, interesting.
Yeah, I mean, that's always the constant struggle, right?
Is you've got a lot of dependencies here on and on.
– A huge number of them are optional,
but yes, it can get a little crazy.
– Yeah.
– That's actually a good point to make.
You know, one of the things you'll see
is that there are quite a lot of dependencies,
but you'll see that a lot of them
are tied to optional groups.
And so one of the things that we wanted to do
was make it quick for a user
to kind of pip install one thing
and have all the pieces they need to get started.
And so you can say pip install Litestar,
and you can add the CLI or the standard group,
and it'll automatically install the JS beautifier
and the command line utilities
and rich and a couple of other libraries.
And so there's a lot of helpers
to kind of make that a little bit more easy
to just jump right in.
– Right.
This portion of Talk Python to Me
is brought to you by Sentry.
Is your Python application fast
or does it sometimes suffer from slowdowns
and unexpected latency?
Does this usually only happen in production?
It's really tough to track down the problems
at that point, isn't it?
If you've looked at APM,
Application Performance Monitoring products before,
they may have felt out of place for software teams.
Many of them are more focused on legacy problems
made for ops and infrastructure teams
to keep their infrastructure and services up and running.
Sentry has just launched their new APM service.
And Sentry's approach to application monitoring
is focused on being actionable, affordable,
and actually built for developers.
Whether it's a slow running query
or latent payment endpoint
that's at risk of timing out and causing sales to tank,
Sentry removes the complexity
and does the analysis for you,
surfacing the most critical performance issues
so you can address them immediately.
Most legacy APM tools focus on
an ingest-everything approach,
resulting in high storage costs,
noisy environments,
and an enormous amount of telemetry data
most developers will never need to analyze.
Sentry has taken a different approach,
building the most affordable APM solution in the market.
They remove the noise
and extract the maximum value
out of your performance data
while passing the savings directly onto you,
especially for Talk Python listeners
who use the code Talk Python.
So get started at talkpython.fm/sentry
and be sure to use their code Talk Python,
all lowercase,
so you let them know that you heard about them from us.
My thanks to Sentry
for keeping this podcast going strong.
And it looks like you've got, say, like Oracle
or DuckDB or other things that maybe not everyone,
or, you know, AsyncPG,
all those types of things
that you probably only need one of those, right?
You're probably not doing MySQL, Postgres, and Oracle.
Maybe, but probably not.
We actually do all of them.
And so with the same,
and this is one of the things
that I think is probably good to point out,
is that with the repository contrib module
that we've created,
you actually can use the same repository,
the same models,
the same JSON type,
and it will automatically select the best data type
for whatever engine you're running.
So for instance, if you're on,
let's just say that today
you're running on AsyncPG with Postgres,
and you've got a JSONB data type
using the built-in custom Litestar JSON type,
and tomorrow you convert to Oracle,
all you need to do is change your connect string,
and it'll automatically deploy that to Oracle
with the correct JSON type.
And so you really don't have to do anything additional
to make your code work between that.
So honestly, a lot of that came from my time with Django,
where you got the, you know,
one set of utilities worked with quite a few databases.
And so I spent quite a bit of time
kind of making sure that that worked.
And so you'll see that,
including with the Alembic migrations
that are coming out in 2.1 in a couple of weeks.
And so through the CLI,
you'll be able to actually manage your entire database,
call and configurations and generate them,
as well as, you know,
launch and use your app through the same,
you know, single CLI.
I don't think I'd ever want to migrate to Oracle.
Well, when you need Oracle,
you do need Oracle.
I'm aware of the stigma, but yeah,
there's some times and places for all of them.
I think for those who are unaware
what you're talking about,
you're talking about the SQLAlchemy
repository patterns that we offer.
So the things you mentioned,
they are built on top of SQLAlchemy,
which in itself is already really flexible
and makes it easy to change databases.
But there are still a few gaps
that you need to bridge yourself,
like the ones you've mentioned.
And this is an example of the things
that we try to take care of.
One last note on that.
So a lot of the repositories
that you might see for cookie cutter apps
or the other existing templates out there
usually stop at the basic CRUD operations.
But what we've done here
is actually implemented
all the basic CRUD operations
and efficient bulk operations
based on whatever database you're using.
And we choose the most optimal method for that.
So that includes bulk add,
bulk update, a merge statement,
bulk delete, as well as
all of the standard CRUD operations.
And so one of the things
that we really have focused on
is making sure that this is an incredibly
feature-complete repository
that has all of the functionality
that you might want to use
just right out of the box.
That's really excellent
that you all are handling that for people.
And it gives me a sense of what you mean
by the helping people
do this stuff effortlessly,
bringing a little bit of those batteries
included feel of Django without...
Putting in the batteries.
Without the very prescriptive way
that say Django does.
I guess keeping the micro framework feel,
but bringing along a lot of the stuff
that people would otherwise have to choose
and configure like,
oh, okay, we're going to use...
I guess we'll use SQLAlchemy.
Oh, did you call an async function?
Well, then you're going to also need
the async SQLite library installed.
How do I find that?
Those series of steps
you've kind of got to go through.
And it sounds like
you've taken care of some of that for people.
We try to.
Obviously, we'll continue to evolve it over time.
But I've now used it a year at work at Google.
And it's really kind of satisfied.
I'd say 95% of the use cases I need.
And so I typically don't have to drop back
into raw SQL anymore,
which I think is a huge thing.
And that's what I would like to propose
and get everybody else to.
And so that's where the focus there.
And the one thing I'll add about it
is that we still kind of maintain
that micro framework philosophy,
because all this work is actually packaged up
in something called a plugin.
And so you can configure this one class
and it automatically registers
the route handlers,
the own startup,
own shutdown handlers that need to happen.
It'll register the ASCII lifespan
things that you need.
And so basically you get this one piece
where you can just set up your entire app
and you don't have to do or add the piece
in several parts of your application.
Yeah, excellent.
So before we dive into the features,
which we have been doing a little bit already,
at least some of the philosophy,
I want to talk about benchmarks.
And I know benchmarks are
a little controversial in the sense that,
well, the way I'm using the framework
is different than the way you use it.
The way you use it is really fast.
The way I, you know, whatever, right?
Like putting that out there
and just giving a sense
that this is a really fast framework.
You know, how does it compare to things
like FastAPI or Court,
which is the async version of Flask-ish, right?
They're working on unifying those more,
but basically the async version of Flask for now.
Siennik and then Starlet,
who wants to give us a quick summary
of this graph you got here
in the benchmarks page?
Before we get into the benchmarks,
you said it already,
but I want to add another disclaimer here.
Like, as you said,
benchmarks are really, really controversial topic
and they're insanely hard to get right.
And it's even harder to get actually benchmarks
that are useful for your use case.
And they show you what you actually want to measure
because most of the time they don't.
They measure something,
but they often don't translate one-to-one
or even somewhere close to that
to real-world performance.
And I have spent a lot of time on these benchmarks.
And I want to say that the benchmarks
didn't came about as us trying to compare
to other frameworks,
but we were experiencing some performance regression
internally after a major change somewhere.
And we were trying to track that down.
And for that,
I developed a quite comprehensive benchmark suit
that tried to get us close to a real-world usage
of how we expected the framework to be used.
And then that grew to compare other frameworks as well.
And when I added the other frameworks,
I tried to follow a very, very simple philosophy,
which is not necessarily,
well, some might say it's unfair.
I think it's one way to get a comparable result.
What I tried to do is to not optimize anything.
I just used every,
I built the same app on every framework
with the framework as it comes out of the box,
just took the straight up approach
that's shown in the documentation.
And I did that because from almost all of the frameworks,
there is for every case,
some way to make it a little bit more performant
in this special case and in that special case.
And I'm not an expert in all of these frameworks.
And I'm sure if you start optimizing,
there's no point where you can say,
okay, now it's completely optimized.
So I just took the completely opposite approach
and didn't optimize anything at all.
And that includes Litestar.
We also do things that could be made more performant
in Litestar, but we don't do them in the benchmarks.
Well, that's just our bench line of what we are comparing to.
And I just think it's an important context to have.
Yeah, that seems fair.
So we know what we are comparing.
Right. Okay.
So if we look at the benchmarks,
one thing we can see there,
so we have the synchronous and asynchronous performance.
And one thing that we can see there is that for Litestar,
it's almost identical compared to,
for example, Starlet, where it's not.
The reason for that is our model of execution
for synchronous operations.
What Starlette does and what you could argue is the safe way
is to run these in a thread pool by default,
which is good because if you have a synchronous function
and asynchronous framework, and it's blocking,
you might potentially block your main thread
and all other requests that are coming in at the same time.
You don't want that.
So definitely the safest option is to just put that
in a thread pool, let it run, and you're good.
The thing is threads are slower than asyncio.
And so what we do is we force our users
to make a deliberate choice
when they have a synchronous function.
So we say, do you want to run that synchronous function
in a thread pool or not?
And if not, we just don't do that.
– Is that done by a parameter to the, you know,
like at get or something, and then you say thread pool,
yes or no, or something like that?
– You can set that as a parameter.
And if you don't, and you use a synchronous function,
you get a very nasty warning about that.
You can shut that off globally because some, yeah, that.
– Sync to thread equals false. Okay, cool.
– Yeah, you can shut that off globally
if you don't want to be warned about it.
But so we made the decision that it should be
a deliberate choice if you want that behavior or not,
because in many cases, you don't actually need that behavior
because you're not doing any blocking IO operations
or any other blocking or CPU bound operations or whatever.
So the, in fact, the synchronous functions are as blocking
as the other async functions.
So there's no benefit to be had from running it in a thread.
– Yeah, and also a lot of times in production,
the production server like G-Unicorn or whatever
is already using multiple threads or things to deal with that.
And when, or at least multiple processes.
And then when you're talking to things like a database
or something, you're doing a network call,
which deep down is probably releasing the gill
while it's waiting anyway, right?
There's a lot of subtleties that are happening down there
that maybe you don't want to juggle, right?
– One point to add to that is that the sync to thread option
applies to the dependency injection as well.
And so it's not just the routes that you can add that flag to.
And so to your point about databases,
all those pieces can have that same kind of behavior.
– There's a benchmark for that as well,
somewhere that shows the same difference
for the dependency stuff, I think.
Yeah, so that's one difference and another difference.
And so just to add, this is one choice
that Started makes for you
and by extension FastAPI as well makes for you
that you can't easily turn off.
But if you look, for example, at the Sonic example,
you see that it doesn't suffer from the same problem.
So you can attribute that to this decision.
The other big difference is because what we're looking at here
is serializing a dictionary into a list of dictionaries
into JSON.
And one of the reasons why Litestar is so much faster
in this than FastAPI, for example,
is because we use msgspec,
which is a JSON validation and parsing library.
Well, not just JSON, it's also for MessagePack,
which is an insane thing.
It's an insanely great piece of technology,
which we have been using, I think,
for almost a year now.
When we started to introduce it, yeah, that one.
And it's super fast.
It's written in C.
The code can be a bit hard to get into
because it's like one massive 12,000 line C file.
So if you're not very familiar with C and the Python C API,
it's not going to be an easy read.
Yeah, but it's insanely fast.
And it supports a lot of things out of the box.
So for example, well, JSON, so all built in Python data types,
but it also supports data classes and type dicts,
which helps us a lot.
And FastAPI, on the other hand, by default,
well, it uses, for one, uses a standard library JSON module,
which isn't as fast as any of the other external,
not external, third party JSON libraries that you can have.
And it also uses Pydantic to validate the data,
which I have to point out is something
that we do not by default.
So that's the reason why there's such a big difference.
And even after Pydantic 2 has been released,
which has been rewritten in Rust
and has had a significant gain in performance.
Yes, Samuel Colvin says something like 22 times faster,
which is remarkable.
Yeah, but still, if you just don't do that step at all,
it's obviously going to be faster.
So yeah, that's true.
Can you, do you remember this graph here,
whether this is FastAPI based on Pydantic 1 or 2?
This is Pydantic 2.
Okay.
You could see that it's noticeably faster now with Pydantic 2.
So there has been a huge gain.
And to be fair to Pydantic and FastAPI, mostly FastAPI,
you could also use FastAPI's OR JSON response,
which uses OR JSON to serialize that.
And it would be a lot faster.
But as I said earlier,
that would, to me, fall into the category of optimization.
You could do similar things for Litestar.
And what we wanted to compare is performance out of the box.
And this is what you get.
Talk Python to me is partially supported by our training courses.
Python's async and parallel programming support is highly underrated.
Have you shied away from the amazing new async and await keywords
because you've heard it's way too complicated
or that it's just not worth the effort?
With the right workloads,
a hundred times speed up is totally possible
with minor changes to your code.
But you do need to understand the internals.
And that's why our course,
Async Techniques and Examples in Python,
show you how to write async code successfully
as well as how it works.
Get started with async and await today
with our course at talkpython.fm/async.
That's some of the stuff you were talking about, right?
You could include new JSON parsers.
You could include UV loop, for example,
and lots of optimizations, right?
The benchmarks are on UV loop.
I think that's one optimization we did across the board for everybody.
Everyone uses a single UV corn worker.
Yes. So the environment is the same
for all frameworks that we test.
It's UV corn with UV loop,
the Cython dependencies and one worker
pinned to one CPU core that's shielded.
So it just sort of get like something comparable.
And that's awesome, actually.
That's really cool. I like it.
And I guess I'd just like to point out though,
that often there's other things
that are in your bottleneck in your application, right?
And so obviously benchmarks,
take them with a grain of salt.
And the other thing is that message pack,
or message spec, excuse me, is awesome,
but it's not as feature complete as something like pedantic,
which is really great.
So I think there's some differences there.
And so we wanted to make sure
that you have the ability to use both.
But in the context of benchmarks,
sometimes I guess it's worth noting
that pedantic is probably doing more
or can do more than msgspec.
But I don't think it's necessarily always going to be
what you see here at the serialization piece
that's going to be your slowest part.
I agree. As a database guy,
you might have database indexes
and the lack thereof coming to mind or something, right?
Well, that's one of the things, right?
You know, it's, and you kind of touched on it.
It's the network latency and those kinds of things
between that's really going to consume
quite a bit of the time.
Yeah.
And I think we do have a benchmark,
which is serialization of complex objects,
like Pydantic models or data classes
of something like that,
which actually I think is very interesting
because it shows that if you're using pedantic
with Litestar, it's actually not faster than FastAPI,
because then what you're measuring
is the speed of pedantic,
which in both cases is the same.
And you can, it sounds like, which is interesting.
Okay. So quick takeaway, Litestar is quite fast.
One of the reasons you might choose it is the speed.
And it sounds like there's a lot of good options there.
All right.
But not the only one.
I want to point out, on that note,
if you allow me to point out one more thing.
Of course.
We are quite fast.
And I think for the feature set that we have,
we are probably among the fastest,
but we are not by far the fastest ASGI framework out there.
That would be, to my knowledge, Black Sheep,
which is insanely fast.
And we actually don't include that in the benchmarks
because it makes the benchmarks absolutely useless
because then you just have one gigantic bar,
that's Black Sheep.
And then you have two very, very teeny, tiny bars,
which is everything else,
which is another micro framework that's written in Cython.
I have not heard of Black Sheep.
That's something I have to look into.
Okay, cool.
But obviously, speed is interesting.
Speed is important.
It's certainly something that if it was really poor,
people might choose like, well, it's interesting,
but it's not that fast.
But given the speed, it's certainly an advantage,
not a drawback.
But I think a lot of the advantages come from
a bunch of the features.
So maybe we could talk through some of these
and whoever wants to just jump in on them
as we go, feel free to.
So I think it probably came through already
from the conversation,
but the programming API is very micro framework,
Flask, FastAPI like, right?
You create a function, you do an at get,
give it a URL, decorator on the front,
and you've got an endpoint on the web
that you can do things with.
So that's pretty straightforward.
At its core, exactly.
And we take it one step further.
So all of the patterns you know and love from Django.
So some of the things that you see
from Django REST framework.
So we have controllers that are very similar to that,
where you can define a class
and have multiple methods in it.
And so, you know, that's really kind of where
things start to differentiate.
But at its core, we definitely wanted to make sure
you had that exact micro framework experience
that you see everywhere.
So the first one,
let's just touch on some of the main features here.
The first one is data validation and parsing.
So leveraging the power of type ints,
which is very, very nice.
Who wants to highlight that feature?
Take your own mute.
Good that you pointed that out.
So that's definitely one of the areas
that was directly inspired by a FastAPI.
Because FastAPI, a few years ago,
came up with this brilliant idea of the combination
of just leveraging the type hints
and the emerging Pydantic stuff and whatever,
and build your APIs on that,
based around that as your core.
And it's been very increasingly popular
to build your APIs like that.
So it's definitely directly inspired
and influenced by this.
We are approaching things a bit differently though.
So for example, you are not tied to Pydantic.
You can use any data modeling, not any,
but a lot of data modeling libraries
that you might want to choose
are supported out of the box.
Pydantic is supported.
You can also use the method spec,
which supports some data modeling like Pydantic,
not as featureful, but very, very fast.
You can use adders,
you can use plain data class or type dicts
to validate your data and to transform your data,
which is what you are currently looking at,
which are our DTOs,
which have been written by the brilliant Peter Schutt,
who isn't here with us today,
which are, well, data transfer objects.
So they are a way for you to define
how your data should be transformed on the way in
or on the way out.
So you have incoming data that's unstructured,
JSON data, and you have a target model,
and you might want to apply certain transformations to that,
say rename fields from snake case to camel case,
very common thing to do
while you are validating it on the fly
that it confirms to a certain schema,
for example, a Pydantic model or a data class.
And so DTOs are basically an abstraction layer
between that where you can say,
okay, this is my source model,
this is my Pydantic model,
and it has a user ID that's an integer
and it has a name that's a string.
And by default, Litestar,
if you give it that,
will validate that the incoming data
confirms to that schema,
will have Pydantic run all the validation
and parsing on it like you would normally,
which is quite similar to how FastAPI does it,
or how you might also want,
would do it by hand.
The DTOs come in where you have one data model
that has different representations.
So for example, you might have a database model
that's a SQLAlchemy model,
but on the way out,
you don't want to include the password field
because of reasons.
But you want it on the way in
when you create the user to sign up.
So one way to do that manually would be
if you're using Pydantic to create two models,
one for the way in,
one for the way out,
or to create one base model
with all the properties that are the same
and then two additional models, whatever.
DTOs basically do that,
but they do it for you.
So you don't have to actually write out
those two models.
They can take in one of the models,
one of the supported model types.
I think at the moment,
we support Pydantic, SQLAlchemy,
msgspec, Adders, and DataClasses.
Correct me if I'm wrong.
No, I think you got all of them.
So if you have a class of that type,
you can create DTO from it.
And then you have a DTO config
where you can say,
exclude these fields
or only include these fields
and rename these fields.
And all you have to do
is create a type annotation with that DTO.
And Litestar will take it,
use it to transform your data,
and then give you back
your original model
in the form you specified.
I see.
And you say in the decorator,
you set the DTO model
that does that conversion for you.
Got it.
Yeah, that's a good point.
You set it in the decorator
and not at the point
where you receive or return the data.
So the data you receive and return
will always be the actual model
that you're dealing with,
which has the great benefit
that your type annotations
are always correct.
And you don't have to worry about that,
about, you know, casting something
to something else
or doing the serialization
in your route handler directly,
because otherwise the type annotations
for the return type won't match
because you have excluded the field
or whatever.
So you just set it
completely separately from that,
just as information for Litestar
to say, okay, use this
to do the transformations.
But the end result is my original model,
whatever you want it to be.
Okay, so this is kind of
the model equivalent of FastAPI.
The DTO, that's really neat.
There's a lot of,
maybe a little bit of overlap
in something like SQL model, right?
Where you can declare
your SQLAlchemy model
as a Pydantic model.
And in this case,
and you're welcome to use SQL model
with Litestar,
but in this case,
you can now just use
the normal SQLAlchemy model
and declare a DTO
and it'll automatically convert that
to, you know, a msgspec struct
on the way out
and serialize it that way.
Very cool.
That's a good point.
You bring up the msgspec struct.
So that's one other area
where we use message spec
for to create these models
because msgspec is extremely fast
and has this struct type,
which is sort of like an Adders class
or a Pydantic model,
but it has the benefit of being,
as far as I know,
the fastest library
for that type of stuff
for Python that exists at the moment.
So what we are building there,
the transformation layer
is as performant as it can be.
Excellent.
In fact, I think,
and I had to go look up
the actual quote,
but I think the struct
is actually faster
than the data class
in a lot of scenarios.
And so they've done
an incredible job with that library.
That is incredible, actually.
And you're beating the building stuff, right?
That's cool.
All right.
We talked a little bit
about the open ecosystem, right?
The ability to use pedantic
versus other custom DTOs,
other libraries,
open API, swagger,
the whole generate
your documentation for you.
That sounds pretty excellent.
I'm guessing it's based
a little bit on the DTOs as well
to describe the schema.
Every class has the ability
to export what that output looks like.
And so the DTO knows
how to output its signature
so that it can generate
the correct open API schema.
And I guess really
the main thing to point out,
and we obviously do
the typical swagger schemas,
but one other thing that we add in
is redot and stoplight elements as well.
And so you've got a couple of options
for your documentation host.
Middleware.
So middleware is things
that can see the request
before your view function runs
or make changes after it runs
for cores or logging or other things.
Want to talk about that?
Cody, do you want to talk about
another ChromePreston stuff, for example?
I'll happily do that.
So, you know, you kind of nailed
what the core of the middleware is,
but really it's all those pieces
that you need to add in
to maybe add in security
or add in some type of
additional functionality,
compression, for instance.
And so a lot of, you know,
outside of the plugin system,
a lot of that functionality
is included in the middleware.
And so you'll see built in stuff
for most of the things
that you're going to want to do
out of a normal application.
There's probably a few things
that you may need to roll on your own,
but we've got all the core things.
And so you've got compression,
both broadly and GZIP.
You've got open telemetry
and Prometheus integration.
You've got several different types
of authentication backends
that would get integrated here,
including a session-based backend
that one, there's a cookie-based backend
and a session-based backend
where it stores, you know,
on the actual server itself.
And we also have a JWT auth
configuration that you can use here.
And so I encourage all the listeners
to just check out what we have
as part of the default middleware.
But, you know, most of the things
that they're going to want to do
from a web app
are going to be built right in.
We also have the logging,
the cores, all the basic stuff.
See it like cross-site,
reference, rate limiting.
Cross-site, yeah,
requests forgery for forms.
Yeah.
And then you can add your own
and they're all just little ASCII apps
that you can plug in as you need them.
On before and on after requests,
something like that, right?
This is really cool here
where you could say
in a particular view decorator,
you can say, for example,
exclude from CSRF
for just this form, for example.
And actually, this is something
that you'll see as a feature.
You're going to see this
all throughout the code
and it's layered permissions.
And so this exclude from CRS,
CRSRF and several other things.
You may see that.
It is a mouthful.
You're going to see that
in several different places, right?
And so you can apply that at the controller
or you can apply that at the
route level that you see here.
And so that's one of the
helpful features that you'll see
where you can put it in one spot.
It'll cascade down.
Yeah, I saw that for the DTOs.
Yeah, we have a lot of that
like layered dependency stuff,
like the dependency,
but dependency injection,
like you could also do at the app level
or just at the controller level.
There's so much other applications,
controllers, routers
and the route handles.
These are our basic layers.
And most of these types
of configurations,
so middleware's dependencies,
header configurations,
middleware configurations,
they're all layered.
So you can apply them
on every layer you want
and they will affect
the layers below that.
So it's quite flexible
how you want to
or where you want to configure your stuff.
Well, the ORM integration,
we talked a little bit
about SQLAlchemy as well.
So that's pretty cool.
And I'll be happy to elaborate on that.
But, you know,
we've covered quite a bit
of what you'll see here.
I think the only thing
that I haven't mentioned
that we've integrated in
and that will be coming in 2.1
is the use of lambda statement.
And I'm not sure if you're even
have seen that or if your listeners have,
but it's a relatively new function
that's in SQLAlchemy
to help with statement caching.
And so the repository
has been converted over that.
Actually, I see some great things
in the chat.
There's HTMX integration.
Obviously, we want to make sure
we touch on that.
And I really want to let somebody
talk about the WebSockets
and the channels integration too.
So there's some really cool stuff
I'd love for your listeners to hear.
Before we move on to the WebSockets,
which I also want to talk about,
I do want to give,
since we're on the ORM integration,
I can see some comments out there
from, for example, Roman behind Beanie,
which is a MongoDB ORM or ODM.
Says, I like the DTO concept.
Having such tools separately would be great.
I mean, things such as SQLAlchemy,
excuse me, SQLAlchemy objects
when needed, pandas, data frames,
by data model, depending on the context
is really cool.
We actually have talked about that.
Well, not we, the people present here,
but Peter Schutt, the person who created
the DTO implementation at me,
we have actually talked about that,
making the DTOs a separate library
because it's a very useful concept.
So it's not something we have planned.
It's something that has crossed our minds as well.
– That's very cool.
The question was,
what about the MongoDB people
or the other NoSQL folks
for whom SQLAlchemy
doesn't necessarily want to talk to
because it's relational?
What's the story there?
Like, is it still pretty easy to use Litestar?
– It is.
And I think that there's actually
a native integration
that's maybe not totally finished,
but there is an open PR
for a Mongo-based repository.
So there's going to be that much tighter coupling
coming soon for those that want to use it.
But if they,
there's nothing that would limit compatibility now.
So if they want to go ahead and configure that
with their application,
there, you're certainly free to do so.
But there will be a first party
kind of clean integration
for those things coming soon.
– Oh, that's excellent.
So for right now,
you know, B&E is based on Pydantic.
You all work with Pydantic.
It sounds like,
can I just use that as the go-between maybe?
– Absolutely.
And you're free to use Pydantic with Litestar
just as you can with FastAPI,
and it'll just work.
And so there's no reason to change everything
to msgspec if you want to.
You can mix and match
and leave everything in Pydantic
if that's what you prefer as well.
– That's a good point.
So the thing we do,
all these integrations with Pydantic
and others and whatever,
so they are not baked in
somewhere deep into the application.
They are all plugins,
plugins that you could write yourself
if you wanted to
and write for every library that you desire.
That's one of the larger things
that we tackled with the 2.0 release,
where we tried to decouple us from Pydantic
because we were based on Pydantic before
and we wanted to be more open.
So we basically ripped out everything Pydantic
in Litestar's core
and put it into a plugin
and at the same time made sure
that the plugin API was so versatile
that it could support all the features
that we had supported before.
And now we're at the point
where it's very trivial actually
to add support for a library like Pydantic
with everything from DTOs to OpenAPI
to serialization, validation, parsing
fully supported by a fairly trivial plugin
that you have to add.
So even if it's not provided out of the box,
it's fairly easy to just do it yourself.
It's really cool.
All right, WebSockets.
Let's talk about WebSockets here a little bit.
Janik was the mastermind behind this.
All right, Janik, first tell people
what WebSockets are and why they care about them.
Why is this not just another HTTP request?
WebSockets, explaining WebSockets
in a few sentences.
Probably not that easy.
Yeah, you have three sentences, go.
So for people who have been around longer
in the web development space,
they might remember long polling.
So where you had, where you faked,
well, back and forth communication
between the server and the client
by having a request that never terminates.
And then you can always send more data
from the server because the request
wasn't actually done yet.
And I would say WebSockets is kind of like
that concept but evolved.
So you can easily send bidirectional data
from the server to the client
with a very, very minimal overhead.
And WebSockets are a core functionality of ASGI.
You could, there were several ways
you could do WebSockets with WSGI,
but they were all not very easy and straightforward
because they are asynchronous by nature.
This is what they are.
They are an asynchronous communication channel.
So baking that into a synchronous protocol
is always a bit tricky.
And I think there's no ASGI framework
that I know of that does not support WebSockets
in some way.
So it is a core functionality of that type
of Python framework, I would say.
And so our WebSocket implementation
has kind of like two layers.
You have the low layer where it's basically
you receive the socket object,
which is just the connection.
And then you can act on that connection
and you have to accept it and you can terminate it
and you can send data or whatever.
And then you have what we call WebSocket listeners,
which are an abstraction over WebSockets.
And they basically work like you would normally define
a route handle in Flask or FastAPI or Litestar,
where you receive some data
and then you return some data and that is your function.
And the rest will be handled by the listeners.
So you define a handler function for an event
that might occur.
One of the cool aspects of this is that these support
all the features that Litestar supports
in other layers of the application.
So you can use DTOs with them.
You can use validation with them.
So if you define a DTO and you say,
okay, so this is my model
and this is what I want to receive,
the incoming data from the WebSocket
will be parsed as this model.
It will be validated
and then it will be presented to your function.
So functionally, these WebSocket listeners,
they look and work exactly the same
as a regular HTTP route.
Yeah, that's really cool.
Enables another thing that a lot of ACI frameworks
don't have, which is handling of WebSockets synchronously,
because we do the async stuff in the background.
And so you can use an asynchronous function,
but you can also just synchronous function
because all the dealing with the actual WebSocket itself
is handled somewhere else.
It's deeper, yeah.
So my thought was probably this is what I want to write
in a standard, like I want to receive a message
from the client back to the server
or and process that there.
But if you want to do like all the weird multicast stuff,
different listeners or groups of listeners,
you can do with WebSockets.
That's probably the lower level version
you're talking about, right?
Did I get that right?
Yeah, perhaps not.
It depends how weird you want to get.
So a fairly standard use case would be for something
like, let's say, a chat room where you have some sort
of predefined channels and then you have multiple clients
that want to send data over the same channel
and then fan it out to all the other clients.
And for stuff like that, we actually
have a full integration, which we call channels,
which themselves aren't necessarily
tied to WebSockets.
They are basically distributed message bus sort of thing.
I have yet to come up with a good, short description
of what channels actually are.
It changes a bit from depending what I'm talking about.
I think message bus is the way to think about it, right?
And it keeps the history of the events.
And so a message bus is perfectly fine.
They are backed by, at the moment,
by Redis via different methods.
So you can use PubSub or other methods that
are quite a bit more involved.
And they can also handle WebSockets for you.
So you can say, OK, so I want to create a channel named Chat.
And every time someone signs up to that,
please accept the WebSocket request
and then add the client to this subscriber list.
And then every time a message comes in, I want to do this.
And then I also want to distribute the message
they send to all these other clients in those channels.
And I know if they send a special message,
then I want to unsubscribe them.
And so for this kind of standard use case, we have that built in.
You can, of course, build your own logic on top of that.
And as you said, if you want to go into really weird stuff,
you will have to use the low-level interface, which
is also there, which you can also
access from the WebSocket listener.
So you can, via dependency injection,
just receive the raw socket object
if you want to deal with that for some reason.
So it's available if you need it,
but you can do the easy thing by default.
Oh, awesome.
That sounds really cool.
And the channels sound great.
Also, Chris out in the audience said,
does that also mean server-side events are?
Yes.
Server-sent events, rather, excuse me, are available.
And I saw that you have a dependency on HTTPxSSE,
which is like a lightweight, lightweight WebSocket
type of thing.
It's very cool.
That's a development dependency for testing.
Ah, for testing.
OK.
So we do have server-sent events support built in.
You can do that.
And you can, for example, use that
in combination with channels.
So instead of fanning out the messages via WebSockets,
you could do that with a server-sent event as well.
Excellent.
All right.
We're getting quite short on time.
I want to close this out with maybe
what would be the last thing in the process of building out
an app in Litestar?
That would be deployment.
And I didn't see a lot of conversation
about how I should be deploying this stuff on the website.
But I saw on the benchmarks that you said,
we use GUnicorn with the UVicorn worker and so on.
And it sounds like maybe using GUnicorn is a good option.
What's the deployment story?
What do you tell people that want to put this
in some real scaled-out production story?
That's still a good option.
But personally, I think Cody's well.
We've just been using UVicorn, not as a worker,
just by itself.
That has worked really well.
It really just depends on how you're going to run it.
So if you're using Docker or Kubernetes or something else
that's managing that process, then it's
possible that GUnicorn may not be something that really
is needed in your environment.
And in fact, it might actually just add overhead.
And so if you've got something like Cloud Run or Docker
or Kubernetes or anything like that,
what we've realized is that sometimes it's
quite a bit faster to just run it with UVicorn.
And if the process dies, then your container management,
whatever you're using to manage those things,
will automatically start and scale those processes out.
It notices that the container exited anyway,
and so it's going to create a new one, right?
OK, got it.
Correct, yeah.
But if I'm going to a Linux machine directly?
Then I think there's more of a decision
to make on whether or not you want to host it
through something like GUnicorn.
And I guess the other thing I'd like to add
is that really there's any of the ASCII servers
can run Litestar.
So you've got Daphne, Hypercorn.
There's work that we're doing right now with Socketify.
It's a mouthful as well.
But they've got some cool stuff going on there.
And so hopefully we'll have compatibility with that soon.
And so yeah, the idea is that the same way
that you would host any other ASCII app
would apply to how you would manage a Litestar app.
Excellent.
And maybe Nginx or something like that in front for SSL
and Let's Encrypt and all those things.
Absolutely.
I think that's probably about it for time.
Final thing here.
So you all said you just released a week ago or so.
Last week, released version two.
I want to give a quick shout out to the changes
for people maybe already using it.
I don't know if that's even possible.
This has been in development for over seven months now.
Okay.
And there have been substantial changes
to basically every part of the application
that you could think of.
A lot of the features that we have talked about today,
they are new in version 2.0.
The DTOs, they are new in 2.0.
The SQLAlchemy integration is new.
Channels are new.
The WebSocket listeners are new.
Message spec integration is new.
Pedantic billing being optional is new.
So I think it doesn't make a lot of sense
to compare it to version 1.0.
So just in this context.
Strongly encourage people to use 2.0.
Yeah, definitely.
Please use version two.
We also have the new stores interface.
As well.
And so many other features that I forgot about
or don't have time to list.
HTMX request.
All sorts of good stuff.
Okay.
Yeah, there have been so many people,
amazing contributors over the last several months
spending time on this
and delivering awesome features for us,
for the community.
There's been so much work going into this.
And well, I was relieved when I finally
was able to hit the publish button on GitHub
and we could finally get it out.
It's a big, big project.
That's right.
A lot of people have already been using version 2.0
in production.
Cody, you have.
Jacob, you have as well.
Basically, since we started development,
I actually haven't.
I've stuck on 1.5 for a long time.
Now it's out.
One of the things I'll add is that
the velocity of the project is,
it seems to be really high.
And it's encouraging to see all the contributions
and all the edits that everybody's making.
And so I, for one, I'm really excited about
what it's going to look like in a year.
I think we've got a lot of opportunity ahead of us
and looking forward to seeing everybody jump in
and try things out.
And if something doesn't work the way that you want it to,
feel free to open up an issue or hop on Discord.
We're all very responsive
and would love to kind of hear
what our users are thinking about
as they build their applications.
It seems like a great framework.
I really like the balance you're striking
between the micro frameworks
and some of the batteries included.
So congrats to all of you.
Now, before we get out of here,
just I'll ask one quick question,
you know, for I usually ask at the end,
and that is a quick shout out to some package
or library out there that you like
and want to spread the word about.
I guess I'll start.
DuckDB for me.
So I have used a massive amount of DuckDB
and you can kind of think about it
as like an analytical SQLite.
And so it's in process.
And so you can start it up
and just run SQL directly from your Python process.
And so the project that I'm working on at Google
actually has quite a bit of DuckDB
as kind of this like middle ETL piece
where data gets ingested.
We do things in DuckDB
and then that actually gets exported
to BigQuery or other database engines.
And so this really has kind of opened up
the flexibility of us
to be able to do quite a bit of transformations,
just in RAM without having to write to disk.
That's cool.
An in-process SQL lab database management system.
Cool.
He's been recruiting us to use DuckDB
for quite a while now.
And he succeeded.
That's cool.
I love what the standard library has,
but Click is like one of my favorite CLI building tools.
Rich is the thing that makes you
make your terminal beautiful.
But there's this really cool package.
I mean, you can use them both separately,
but rich-qlik.
And it's what we use for our CLI.
You have the great Click CLI building stuff,
but then rich on top of it
automatically makes everything pretty.
That's cool.
So it's like all the magic and niceness of rich,
but available for Click,
like colors and your help documents.
I haven't gotten to check out Sebastian's typer yet,
but I've seen some screenshots
and it's sort of similar.
I don't know a whole lot about that,
but I think it also uses rich, right?
I think so.
Nice.
All right, Yannick.
Well, for me, it's got to be message spec
because it's just...
So if you do any kind of JSON parsing or serialization
or msgspec parsing or serialization
or data modeling that you might usually
want to do with a data class
and want to add a bit of validation on top,
or just if you're curious,
you should absolutely check this library out
because it's super amazing.
The author is really, really great.
I can just give him just a huge shout out
because he's done such a great job
at supporting our integration with it.
It has been quite a tight collaboration at some points
because when we started integrating it,
there were a lot of things where we felt like,
okay, so, well, we kind of can't use it right now
because of this reason or that reason.
And he's been so responsive and helpful
in finding ways for us to work around that
or just straight up implementing features
that were missing for us.
And it's really...
That's pretty awesome.
I can't thank him enough.
It's really great.
It's a pleasure to work with him.
And it's an awesome library
that everyone should check out, I think.
Cool. That's news to me.
So I will definitely check it out.
All right. Well, thank you all for being here.
Final call to action.
People want to get started with Litestar.
What do you tell them?
Go to lightstar.dev.
You can read the docs.
Use it 15 minutes, 30 minutes.
You'll know if you like it or not.
Join us on Discord if you have questions.
We're happy to help answer anything that may come up.
I don't think I can add anything valuable to that anymore.
All right.
Well, yeah.
Sounds good, guys.
Thank you for being here.
Congrats on the project.
Thank you, Michael.
Bye-bye.
This has been another episode of Talk Python to Me.
Thank you to our sponsors.
Be sure to check out what they're offering.
It really helps support the show.
Take some stress out of your life.
Get notified immediately about errors and performance issues
in your web or mobile applications with Sentry.
Just visit talkpython.fm/Sentry and get started for free.
And be sure to use the promo code talkpython, all one word.
Want to level up your Python?
We have one of the largest catalogs of Python video courses over at Talk Python.
Our content ranges from true beginners to deeply advanced topics like memory and async.
And best of all, there's not a subscription in sight.
Check it out for yourself at training.talkpython.fm.
Be sure to subscribe to the show.
Open your favorite podcast app and search for Python.
We should be right at the top.
You can also find the iTunes feed at /itunes,
the Google Play feed at slash Play, and the direct RSS feed at /rss on talkpython.fm.
We're live streaming most of our recordings these days.
If you want to be part of the show and have your comments featured on the air,
be sure to subscribe to our YouTube channel at talkpython.fm/youtube.
This is your host, Michael Kennedy.
Thanks so much for listening.
I really appreciate it.
Now get out there and write some Python code.
Bye.
this is a test.